= transcript/gene file =
A transcript/gene file is a [[tsv]] file containing a list of transcripts.
Each line contains one transcript. 
The standard region fields (chromosome, begin and end) indicate the
location of the transcript (and the transcript file is thus also a region file)
while other fields indicate the strand, exons etc.

The basic fields for a transcript file are
; chromosome: chromosome name
; begin: transcription start position
; end: transcription end position
; strand: indication of the strand; + or -, empty or . can be used for unknown
; exonStarts: list of exon start positions
; exonEnds: list of	Exon end positions
; cdsStart: start of the coding region (genomic position)
; cdsEnd: end of the coding region (genomic position)
; transcript: Name of transcript (usually transcript_id from GTF)
; gene: name of gene. This field preferentially
        contains the HGNC name for the gene, but other ids are possible
; geneid: This field typically contains	the id of a gene (e.g. ensembl id for gene)

Most genomecomb tools will accept some (commonly encounterd) alternative
fieldnames if these are not present:
; chromosome: "chrom", "chr", "chr1", "genoName", "tName" and "contig"
; begin: "start", "end1", "chromStart", "genoStart", "tStart", txStart", "pos" and "offset"
(end1 is recognised as begin because of the structural variant code in genomecomb, where start1,end1
and start2,end2 regions surround a SV).
; end: "start2", "chromEnd", "genoEnd", "tEnd" or "txEnd"
; transcript: "transcript_id", "transcriptid", "name"
; gene_name: "gene","name2", "geneid", "gene_id"

Any other fields can be added, but the following are common:
; category: field indicating if the transcript is known, novel or intergenic (transcript of a novel gene); 
for novel transcripts how they differ from (the closest) known transcript can be added after novel (, e.g. novl_in_catalog)
; exonCount: number of exons
; source: source of data
; geneid: a gene identifier, such as the ensembl id. This field
  can be used to add a specific id as well as the HGNC name (in gene).
  Genomecomb also checks the fields "gene_id","gene_name","gene", "name2"
  for this. Remark that these alternative field names overlap with gene
  alternatives. This provides for when no specific gene id was provided.
