= Bcol_make =

== Format ==
cg bcol make ?options? bcolfile column ?srcfile?

== Summary ==
Creates a [[bcol]] file

== Description ==
The bcol_make commands creates a [[bcol]] file based on tab-separated data.
The input data is given via stdin. The data in one of the columns (given as a parameter)
in the file is converted to the binary format. 

Values in the input file can be assigned to specific positions using the
poscol parameter, which indicates which field will contain the position. A
default value will be added in the bcol file for positions skipped in the
input file. If the endcol parameter is also given, all values between
first pos ition and end will be set to the value in the value column. The
optional chromsomecol parameter can be used to indicate which field must
be used to assign values to a specific chromosome.
If the input file contains fields with names recognized for chromosome,
begin or end, these will be automatically used for these parameters. If these
fields are present, but you do not want to use them, set the parameters explicitely
to empty

Multiple columns (of the same type) can be stored in one bcol file, e.g. for
variant annotation (a different score for each potential alternative allele)
using the -m and -l options.

== Arguments ==
; **bcolfile**: name of bcolfile to be created
; **column**: Name of the column containing the data
; **srcfile**: Name of the file used for providing input data (if not given, default is from stdin)

== Options ==
; **-t type**: type of data, should be one described in the description of the format ([[bcol]])
; **--precision precision**: default precision for display of data in bcol
; **-d defaultvalue** (--default): value that will be given for positions not in the input file
; **-h header** (--header): set to 0 (default is 1) if the input data does not have a header (in this case chromosomecol and poscol must be given by number, starting from 0)
; **-c chromosomecol** (--chromosomecol): name of the column that contains the chromosome
; **-n chromosomename** (--chromosomename): if no chromosomecol is present (no -c), this name will be given as chromosome (default is empty)
; **-p poscol**: name of the column that contains the positions
; **-e endcol**: name of the column that contains the the end positions (in case of regions, this cannot be used with -m)
; **-co compressionlevel** (--compress): compression level used (default 8): 1 is very fast; 8 is slower, but compresses better, 0 can be used for no compression
; **-l multilist** (--multilist): a comma separated list with the names of all columns, 
e.g. A,C,G,T for variant annotation. This option must be given together with the next option (-m)
; **-m multicol** (--multicol): name of the column containing a list of names the values will be
assigned to. If a name in **multilist** is not present in this list for a row, the
default value will be assigned.

== Category ==
Format Conversion
