= Bam2reg =

== Format ==
cg bam2reg ?options? bamfile ?mincoverage? ?outfile?

== Summary ==
Extract regions with a minimum coverage from a bam file.

== Description ==

== Arguments ==
; bamfile: bam file to analyse
; mincoverage: minimum coverage
; outfile: result file containing the regions with coverage >= mincoverage. 
If not given, a filename of the form sreg-cov<mincoverage>-<bamfilerootname>.tsv
will be used. If the -compress 1 option is given, it will be compressed using zst

== Options ==
; -mincoverage mincoverage: mincoverage given as an option instead of a parameter
; -compress 0/1: Compress the output file (or not) if no outfile is given.
If outfile is given, the extension of the file name will determine compression.
; -distrreg: distribute regions for parallel processing. Possible options are
** 0: no distribution (also empty)
** 1: default distribution
** schr or schromosome: each chromosome processed separately
** chr or chromosome: each chromosome processed separately, except the unsorted, etc. with a _ in the name that will be combined),
** a number: distribution into regions of this size
** a number preceded by an s: distribution into regions targeting the given size, but breaks can only occur in unsequenced regions of the genome (N stretches)
** a number preceded by an r: distribution into regions targeting the given size, but breaks can only occur in large (>=100000 bases) repeat regions
** a number preceded by an g: distribution into regions targeting the given size, but breaks can only occur in large (>=200000 bases) regions without known genes
** g: distribution into regions as given in the <refdir>/extra/reg_*_distrg.tsv file; if this does not exist uses g5000000
** a file name: the regions in the file will be used for distribution
; -refseq refseq: The -distrreg option requires a genome reference sequence, which
must be given using this option
; -skip skipfile: Do not run if skipfile exists

== Category ==
Format Conversion
