= compound =

== Format ==
cg compound ?options? variantfile ?resultfile?

== Summary ==
finds potential compound heterozygosity in a variantfile

== Description ==
This command helps in finding potential compound heterozygosity in a variantfile:
It searches for 2 (or more) variants (limited by given criteria) affecting
the same trasncript/gene in one sample or analysis. The command does not
take into account phasing (yet): Even if both variants are in cis they
will be reported.

The input is a [[format_tsv|variant file]] [[cg_annotate|annotated]] with gene information.
First a secundary result file (named <resultfile_base>-genelist.tsv) is generated that
contains a list of all genes/transcripts affected by multiple variants and
the samples in which multiple variants affect the gene.

The final result file is a variant file containing only variants involved in a compound
interaction. The following extra fields are added: 
; transcripts: shows the transcripts that are affected by multiple variants (including this one)
; compound-<sample>: is given for each analysis/sample: If the variant is
in a compound in this sample, the field gives the number of variants
affecting the same transcript in this sample. It is empty if the variant
is not in a compound with other variants in this sample.

=== impact ===
By default, only variants causing a coding missense (CDSMIS) or higher
in the transcript are counted. Higher here means further down in the gene
impacts list given in [[cg_annotate|annotated]]).

The required impact on the transcript can be changed using the -impact
option. It accepts a (comma separated) list of impacts. You can also use
wildcards (e.g. CDS*) or > to select multiple impacts, e.g. ">=CDSMIS"

=== Criteria ===
Not all variants are counted towards a compound hit in a sample. variants must fulfill a number of
quality criteria (in the analysis). By default the criteria used are
simply that a variant genotype must be called in the sample:
{{{
$sequenced == "v"
}}}
You can change these criteria using the **-criteria** option to e.g. only count high(er)
quality variants:
{{{
$sequenced == "v" and $quality >= 50 and $coverage >= 20
}}}

Notice that field names can be used witout the analysis suffix, e.g.
$sequenced instead of $sequenced-gatkh-bwa-sample1. For these the analysis
specific fields will be used. 

Using the -per option, you can select to search for compound variants 
per sample instead of per analysis. In that case, the field names without 
the sample suffix should be used, e.g.
{{{
$sequenced-gatkh-bwa == "v"
}}}
This allows you to use different analyses of the same sample in the criteria, 
e.g. only select variants called in both gatkh and strelka
{{{
$sequenced-gatkh-bwa == "v" and $sequenced-strelka-bwa == "v"
}}}
When doing per sample analysis, the -criteria argument must be provided.

== Arguments ==
; **variantfile**: tab separated or vcf file containing variants
; **resultfile**: file to which the results will be saved

== Options ==
; -geneset geneset: A variantfile can have annotations of different gene
sets. **geneset** is the base name of the gene annotation, e.g. when it is
"refGene", the field "refGene_descr" will be used to extract the transcript
names, "refGene_gene" for the gene name and "refGene_impact" for the
filtering.
; -impact impacts: **impacts** defines which impact a variant must have omn the transcripts to count.
Possible values are described in the impact section of the description. default: ">=CDSMIS"
; -criteria variantcriteria: criteria used to select variants
Possible values are described in the criteria section of the description. default: "$sequenced == "v""
; -per analysis/sample: By default the compound variants are searched per analysis, meaning you will get e.g.
compound-gatkh-bwa-sample1, compound-strelka-bwa-sample1, compound-gatkh-bwa-sample2, ...
If set to **sample**, compounds will be search per sample.
; -samples samples: a space-separated list of samples, only look in samples given by this parameter
If given, -per sample analysis is used. if you give -per analysis, an error is returned
; -analyses analyses: a space-separated list of analyses, only look in analyses given by this parameter
If analyses is given, -per analysis is used. if you explicitely specify -per sample, an error is returned
; -dbdir: directory with reference databases;
        this is needed if the annotcomparfile is not annotated (e.g. a vcf file)

== Category ==
Analysis

