= collapsealleles =

== Format ==
cg collapsealleles ?options? ?file? ?outfile?

== Summary ==
Convert a split variant file to unsplit by collapsing alleles of the same variant into one line.

== Description ==
In a split [[tsv]] variant file, multiple alternative alleles of the same variant are
on different lines. cg collapsealleles can join these lines to create an
unsplit, multiallelic variant file. 
If multiple lines are merged, most of the fields will contain a list
(comma separated) of the values for that field on the original separate
lines (one element per alternative allele). If they all have the same
value, that single value is put in the result field instead of the list

For some fields the correct value(s) are calculated based on the merged allele lines.
; sequenced: one sequenced code (v if one of the allelles is v, u if one of them is u, ...)
; zyg: one zyg code (e.g. m if one of the joined alleles was homozygous)
; genotypes: list of genotypes (same number as in the individual alleles)

== Arguments ==
; file: file to be converted (from stdin if not given)
; outfile: file to be written (write to stdout if not given)

== Options ==
; -duplicates method: method tells how to deal with situation when there
are multiple lines that contain the same allele (from the same variant)
* keep: keep all (default), the list in alt field can contain duplicate alleles
* max field: pick the one that has the highest value for the given field
* min field: pick the one that has the lowest value for the given field
* first: pick the first one in the file

== Category ==
tsv
