= correctvariants =

== Format ==
cg correctvariants ?options? varfile resultfile dbdir

== Summary ==
Complete or correct a variants file

== Description ==
This command adds ref and alt fields to a variation file that misses them, and fills them.
The alt field wil also be updated based on the alleleSeq* genotype fields if these are 
present in the variant file.
If a ref fields is already present, its contents will be checked, and an error given if there
is a difference with the genome sequence in dbdir. 
The -f (force) or -c (complement) option can be used to correct the ref column instead 
of giving an error.

== Arguments ==
; **srcfile**: variations file
; **dstfile**: resulting variations file
; **dbdir**: database directory with reference sequence, etc.

== Options ==
; **-f 0/1/2**: if 1 (default 0), force overwrite of ref if it is different from the genome sequence in **dbdir**, 
instead of giving an error. "alt", "sequenced" and "zyg" columns are also corrected to reflect the new reference. 
Use "2" to give a warning on the changes
; **-c 0/1**: if 1 (default 0), overwrite ref if it is different from the genome only when it is complement of ref, 
  alt and alleleSeq* are also changed to complement if ref is complement.
  This option is usefull for data originally coming from e.g. a snp array where variants are sometimes
  given in the reverse strand.
; **-s 0/1**: if 1 (default 0), the file is interpreted as a variant file with split alternative 
alleles (i.e. each alternative allele of a SNV is on a separate line as a seperate variant). This 
means e.g. that the alt column will not be updated based on genotypes present.

== Category ==
Conversion
