= colvalue =

== Format ==
cg colvalue ?options? ?infile? ?outfile?

== Summary ==
Converts data in tsv format from a long key-value format to a wide column-value format

== Description ==
In a file in long key-value format, each value is in a separate line,
where each line has identifier fields indicating the object, key fields defining
what the value descibes about the object, and a value field containing the actual value.
"cg colvalue" converts these files to a wide col-value format, where all values
about the object are on the same line in different columns.

The fields identifying the object can be specified using the -idfields option. If not given,
all fields except the key and value fields will be used as idfields.

This command is similar to the [[cg_wide]] command, but more generic. [[cg_wide]] is specifically made
for conveniently converting variant files (to wide variant file format with samples). 
cg colvalue can be used to "transpose" any tsv file.

== Arguments ==
; **infile**: file to be converted, if not given, uses stdin. File may be compressed.
; **outfile**: write results to outfile, if not given, uses stdout

== Options ==
; -idfields list: which fields identify the object (default sample or id)
; -keyfields keyfields: fields which compose the key. If more than one
field is given, the fieldnames will be constructed by concatenating the values with - (default is key or parameter)
; -valuefield: field containing the value (default value)

== Category ==
Conversion
