= exportplink =

== Format ==
cg exportplink ?options? varfile resultfilebase

== Summary ==
make a plink "Transposed fileset" from the genome data

== Description ==
This command makes two files that can be used as a transposed fileset in plink (--tfile option).

; resultfilebase.tfam.pre: This file must be edited and renamed to resultfilebase.tfam: 
Only the names are correct. The other fields (father, mother, sex, phenotype) are set 
to missing (0 or -9) and must be corrected.
; resultfilebase.tped: This file contains the variant and the genotype information.
Variants  with more than two alleles (which are not supported by plink) are skipped with
a warning message. The genetic location is (very roughly) estimated by dividing the 
base position by 1M.

Variant genotypes for samples that have a "u" (unsequenced) in the
sequenced field (or in the zyg field if no sequenced filed is present) are
set to 0 (unknown genotype) in the plink file.

== Use with plink ==
Edit **resultfilebase.tfam.pre** to the correct settings, and rename to resultfilebase.tfam
You can use the files with the -tfile option, e.g.
{{{plink --tfile resultfilebase --recode12}}}

You can use plink to recode to the default plink format (non-tansposed)
{{{plink --tfile resultfilebase --recode}}}

== Arguments ==
; varfile: variant file
; resultfilebase: result file

== Options ==
; -q query: query (as can be given to cg_select). Only variants matching the query are 
included in the result.
; -c 1/0: code genotypes to numbers (reference = 1, alternative allele = 2).
; -samples samples: Only write data for the given samples to the file, if
a sample is not present in the varfile, all genotypes will be set to 0
; -all 0/1: Also include genotypes of samples that have a "u" in the sequenced or zyg field

== Category ==
Analysis
