= Groupby =

== Format ==
cg groupby ?options? fields ?infile? ?outfile?

== Summary ==
Group lines in a tsv file, based on 1 or more identical fields

== Description ==
"cg select -g" provides most of the groupby functionality (and a lot extra). "cg groupby"
can run using little memory on sorted files, while for select results must however allways fit in memory.
Groups lines in a tab separated file, where the value in in the given fields are the same.
By default, entries in data fields (= other than the ones on which the groups are made) are 
concatenated using commas.
Only subsequent lines with the same values in fields are grouped! Sort first if you 
are not sure that they are. If the expected result is not too large to fit in memory, you 
can use the  "-sorted 0" option to avoid sorting first: it wil group same values 
regardless of the order, keeping the results in memory and writing them when finished.

== Arguments ==
; **fields**: list of fields which should be the same for lines to be groups
; **infile**: file to be scanned, if not given, uses stdin. File may be compressed.
; **outfile**: write results to outfile, if not given, uses stdout

== Options ==
; **-sumfields fields**: make the sum of all values in the given fields in stead of concatenating 
  them using commas. The values in the given fields should be numbers
; **-f fields**: return only the fields (separated by spaces) given by -f in the result (and the group field that will always be returned)
; **-stats fields**: create columns with statistics on the values in the given fields in stead of concatenating 
  them using commas. The values in the given fields should be numbers
; **-sorted 0/1**: if 0, same values do not have to be consequitive, but potentially large amounts 
  of memory may be needed (default is 1)

== Category ==
Query
