= genome_seq =

== Format ==
cg genome_seq ?options? regionfile/regions dbdir ?outfile?

== Summary ==
Returns sequences of regions in the genome (fasta file), optionally masked for snps/repeats

== Description ==
This command returns the sequences of the genomic regions given in the
file regionfile in fasta format (to stdout or to a file outfile).
Regionfile is a tab delimited file with at least following columns:
chromosome begin end. Repeatmasker repeats are softmasked (lower case) in
the output sequences. Optionally you can hardmask repeats, and soft or
hardmask known (dbsnp) variants based on frequency.

== Arguments ==
; **regionfile**: tab delimited file containing targets with at least following columns: chromosome begin end.
; **regions**: If the string given for **regionfile/regions** does not exist as a file, it is parsed 
as a list of regions, given by chromosome,begin,end that can be separated in a variety of 
ways (colon, dash, comma, space or newlines), e.g., all of the following formats are accepted:
'chr1:100-200,chr2:100-200' 'chr1 100 200 chr2 100 200' 'chr1-100-200 chr2-100-200'
; **dbdir**: directory containing reference genomes and variation data

== Options ==
; **-f freq** (--freq): only softmask (lowercase) dbsnp variants if they have a frequency > freq (given as a fraction, default is 0, use -1 to include all)
; **-fp freqp** (--freqp): only softmask (lowercase) dbsnp variants if they have a frequency > freqp (given as a percentage, default is 0, use -1 to include all)
; **-n freqn** (--freqn): only mask (using N) dbsnp variants if they have a frequency > freqn (given as a fraction, default is 0.2, use -1 to include all)
; **-np freqnp** (--freqnp): only mask (using N) dbsnp variants if they have a frequency > freqnp (given as a percentage, default is 20, use -1 to include all)
; **-p snpdbpattern** (--snpdbpattern): determines which variant databases are used (dbdir/var_*snpdbpattern*.tsv.gz). default is "snp" for dbsnp.
you can e.g. use "Common" for the common variants in dbsnp
; **-d delsize** (--delsize): only mask (using N) dbsnp variants if they are smaller than delsize (default is 5, use -1 to include all)
; **-r repeatmasker** (--repeatmasker): how to mask repeatmasker repeats: "s" means softmask (lowercase), use "N" to mask using Ns, and 0 for no repeatmasking (default is "s")
; **-i idcolumn** (--id): The ids for the fasta file will be taken from the given column (location will be added after a space)
; **-c concatseq** (--concat): using this option, all regions will be concatenated into one sequence with concatseq between them. To just concatenate the sequences, use -c ''
; **-m mapfile** (--mapfile): Create a map file that describes which regions in the newly created fasta file map to which regions in the genome
; **--namefield namefield**: entries in the map file will have a name obtained from the **namefield** column in the region file
; **-cn concatname** (--concatname): The concatname wil be the name of sequence in the fasta file generated (if not given, the name will be based on the file)
; **-e concatend** (--concatend): The sequence given by concatend will be added to start and end of the final sequence (only if -c  option was used)
; **-ca concatadj** (--concatadj): The concatseq (-c option) will only be added if regions are separated by at least one base. concatadj will be used to concat adjoining regions (and is '' by default)
; **-g windowsize** (--gc): add gc content on id line. if windowsize 0 only total gc content will be added. For windowsize > 0, the max gc content for the given windowsize will also be added (default = -1 for no gc content)
; **-gs gccontent** (--gcsplit): Split the result in low and high gc (high has gc >= **gccontent**).
The gc used depends on the -gc option. If -gc is not given, the maxgc at a windowsize of 100 is used.
This option cannot be combined with concatenating sequences, and outfile has to be specified. 
2 files will be generated with lowgc and highgc added in the given outfile name.
; **-gd 0/1** (--gcdisplay): determines if the gc content is actually displayed on the name line.
By setting this to 0, you can set a windowsize (using -g) to split the files on, without the gc content being displayed on the name line
If you set -gd to 1 without setting -g, the total gc content will be shown
; **-s 0/1** (--split): If this option is 1, each region will be saved as a separate fasta file. The 
; **-l char** (--limitchars): Replace all but alphanumeric characters, _, . and - in the sequence names by **char**

== Category ==
Validation
