= long =

== Format ==
cg long ?infile? ?outfile?

== Summary ==
Converts data in tsv format from wide format (data for each sample in separate columns) 
to long format (data for each sample in separate lines)


== Description ==
Genomecomb usually expects data in tsv files in wide format, where some fields are common/general
for all samples (e.g. chromosome, begin, end, .. for variants) and some fields have specific
values for each sample (e.g. quality, coverage, ...). In wide format these columns are named by
adding "-samplename" to the fieldname. In the long format, sample specific data is on separate
lines (the common fields are repeated in each line). 
"cg long" converts from wide to long format.
"[[cg_wide]]" can be used for the reverse.

== Arguments ==
; **infile**: file to be converted, if not given, uses stdin. File may be compressed.
; **outfile**: write results to outfile, if not given, uses stdout

== Options ==
; -norm 1/0: If 1, output "normalized" long tables: The normal output will contain only variant 
data with a numeric id, without the data specific for each sample. 
An extra tsv file is generated (<outfile>.sampledata.tsv) that contains the sample specific data, one line
per sample (identified by the id) and sample (identified by a "sample" column)
; -samplefields samplefields: Using this option, sample names that consist of several parts separated by - (as typical in 
genomecomb output, e.g. -gatk-rdsbwa-sample1) are split up in separate fields with the field names given by **samplefields**

== Category ==
Format Conversion
