= Map =

== Format ==
cg map ?options? result refseq sample fastqfile ?fastqfile2? ...

== Summary ==
align reads in fastq files to a reference genome using a variety of methods

== Description ==

This is a generic command to map reads to a reference genome using
different methods.

The workload can be distributed on a cluster or using multiple cores with
[[joboptions|job options]] (more info with cg help joboptions) by mapping
the separate fastq files in parallel and efficiently combining the
results. Having the data in enough separate fastq files is required for
good parallelisation.

== Arguments ==
; **result**: resulting aligignment file, the file extension (.bam, .cram, .sam) determines the format of the file
; **refseq**: reference sequence (in fasta format, the reference directory name may be given instead)
; **sample**: sample name (will be used to fill in in the readgroup info)
; **fastqfile**: fastq file with the sequences to be aligned

== Options ==
This command can be distributed on a cluster or using multiple with
[[joboptions|job options]] (more info with cg help joboptions)

; -method method: gives the alignment method/software to be used, e.g.: bwa, minimap2, ngmlr, bowtie2
; -paired 1/0 (-p): fastqs are paired/unpaired; if paired the matching fastqs should be given consecutively, e.g. set1_fw.fastq.gz set1_rev.fastq.gz set2_fw.fastq.gz set2_rev.fastq.gz ...
; -preset preset (-p,-x): some of the mapping software (e.g. minimap2) supports presets, these can be given here, e.g. splice, sr
e.g. all presets supported by minimap2 (map-ont, sr, splice, ..) and ngmlr (ont, pacbio) can be used with their respective methods.
; -readgroupdata readgroupdata: space separated key value list that will be put into the readgroup info (The given sample will be added for some fields)
; -fixmate: use samtools fixmate to fills in mate coordinates and insert size fields
; -sort coordinate/nosort/name/c/1: How to sort the result: "1" and "c" are synonyms for coordinate sort
; -mergesort 1/0: Instead of concatenating and then sorting all sam files, mergesort will merge the already sorted sam files.
This is faster unless a lot of intermediate files have to be made because
of the limit to the number of files that can be opened at the same time. (default 0)
; -maxopenfiles number: the number of files that can be opened at the same time by the system. 
(default is the limit given by the system where the command is run in /proc/self/limits or using ulimit -n)
; -keepsams 1/0: (default 0)
; -threads number (-t): (default 2)
; -mem number: how much memory should be asked/reserved for the mapping (default: decided by method)
; -joinfastqs 1/0: If you have (too) many very small fastq files the fact that fastqs are mapped seperately
can become a performance problem (e.g. more time spent on loading indexes than actual mapping). use joinfastqs
to combine fastq files into one (or 2 in case of -paired 1) before processing. (default 0)
; -compressionlevel number: how much will the result file be compressed (what levels mean depends on the compression method) (default: reasonable level for given method)

== Dependencies ==
Some of the mapping programs supported are distributed with genomecomb (bwa and minimap2), but not all (e.g. ngmlr)
These should be installed separately, and should be runnable from the path.

== Category ==
Mapping

