= Multicompar =

== Format ==
cg multicompar ?options? multicomparfile sampledir/varfile ...

== Summary ==
Compare multiple variant files

== Description ==
This command combines multiple variant files into one multicompar file; a
tab separated file containing a wide table used to compare variants
between different samples. Each line in the table contains general variant
info (position, type, annotation, etc.) and columns with variant info
specific to each sample (genotype, coverage, etc.). The latter have a
column heading of the form field-<sample>.

The <sample> name used is extracted from the filename of the variant
files by removing the file extension and the start of
the filename up to and including the first -. (Variant files are
expected to use the following convention: var-<sample>.tsv.)
<sample> can be simply the samplename, but may also include information
about e.g. the sequencing or analysis method in the form method-samplename, e.g.
var-gatk-sample1.tsv and var-sam-sample1.tsv to indicate variants called
using gatk and samtools respectively for the same sample (sample1), thus
allowing comparison of different methods, etc.

When some samples contain a variant that others do not, the information in
the multicompar file cannot be complete by combining variant files alone:
A variant missing in one variant file may either mean that it is reference
or that it is not sequenced. Other information about coverage, etc. on the
variant not present in the variant file will also be missing. 
multicompar will indicate this missing information with a questing mark in
the table; this missing information can be added by using the -reannot
option or the multicompar_reannot command, if it is available in other
files. (check cg multicompar_reannot help for more info)

== Arguments ==
; **multicomparfile**: resultfile, will be created if it does not exist
; **sampledir/varfile**: directory or file containing variants of new sample to be added
  More than one can added in one command

== Options ==
; **-reannot**: Also do reannotation (see cg multicompar_reannot)
; **-reannotregonly**: Also do reannotation, but only region data (sequenced) will be updated
; **-targetsfile variantfile**: All variants in **variantfile** will be in the final multicompar, even if
they are not present in any of the samples. 
A column will be added to indicate for each variant if it was in the targetsfile. The name of the 
column will be the part of the filename after the last dash. If **variantfile** contains a "name" column, 
the content of this will be used in the targets column instead of a 1.
; **-split**: if 1, multiple alternative alleles will be on a separate lines, treated mostly as a separate variant
Use 0 for the default (alternatives alleles are on the same line, separated by comma in the alt field)

== Category ==
Compare
