= Multicompar_reannot =

== Format ==
cg multicompar_reannot ?options? compar_file ?force? ?regonly? ?skipincomplete?

== Summary ==
Reannotate multicompar file

== Description ==
cg multicompar-reannot will try to add missing information in a multicompar file (see cg multicompar),
such as whether a variant is reference or missing (unsequenced) in a sample that did not contain the
variant.
To do this, it needs extra information beyond the variant file. It will try to find this information
in several locations. It will look for files with this information in sample directories that are siblings to 
or one dir below the multicompar file. The file sreg-<source>.tsv should minimally be available for 
reannotation (sequenced or not); if not, an error is given.

Some region files can be used to fix missing information
* sreg-<source>.tsv should contain all regions that are considered to be sequenced. If the variant
is located in such a region, the sequenced-source value will be changed from ? to r (for reference). Outside 
of these regions it will be annotated as u (unsequenced).
* reg_cluster-<source>.tsv: contains regions of clustered variants. Used to fill in the cluster column if present
* reg_refcons-<source>.tsv or reg_nocall-<source>.tsv: contains poorly called regions (complete genomics). Used to fill in the refcons column if present.

Coverage (and other) information can be obtained from several sources (if found)
* coverage/coverage-*-<chromosome>.bcol: a binary format containing the coverage data for the entire 
genome (organised per chromosome). This format can be created using genomecomb tools, e.g from bam files using cg bam2coverage
* varall-<source>.tsv: a tsv file made by returning "variant" calling results for all positions. This will normally
contain the same columns as the variant file.
* coverage/coverageRefScore-<chromosome>-*.tsv (Complete Genomics): files provided in a Complete Genomics run 
containing the coverage and refscore for each position of the genome.

== Arguments ==
; **compar_file**: multicompar file

== Options ==
; **-force 0/1**: if 1, all data will be updated, otherwise only unfilled (indicated with a ?) cells will be updated
; **-regonly 0/1**: if the regonly option is used, only region data (sequenced) will be updated
; **-skipincomplete 0/1**: go on even if data for some samples is not complete (skipping samples which are e.g. missing coverage data for some of the chromosomes)
; **-paged pagesize**: reannot needs to keep a lot of files open, too many for multicompar files with a lot of samples. Using this
option reannotation is done per group of **pagesize** samples. New files have to be written for each group
; **-pagedstart start**: Start paging from a given number (starts with 0). This is useful if a -paged run was interupted, you can restart from where it stopped.

Some options can also be given as words after the argument
; **force**: if present, all data will be updated, otherwise only unfilled (indicated with a ?) cells will be updated
; **regonly**: if the regonly option is used, only region data (sequenced) will be updated
; **skipincomplete**: go on even if data for some samples is not complete (skipping samples which are e.g. missing coverage data for some of the chromosomes)
== Category ==
Variants
