= Process =

== Format ==
cg make_project ?options? projectdir samplename samplesheet

== Summary ==
Create a project directory from a samplesheet.

== Description ==

make_project is a convenience function to create a
[[projectdir|project directory]] based on a samplesheet. (You can do the
same manually by creating the directories, adding links or copying raw
data files). If the project directory does not exist yet, it will be
created. The command creates sample directories under projectdir/samples,
and adds the given raw data under projectdir/samples/samplename (by
default using softlinks).

The **samplesheet** is a [[tsv]] file with at least the fields "sample"
and "seqfiles" (The command will also recognize fieldnames "fastq" or
"fastqs" instead of "seqfiles")

For each in the samplesheet line the sample (name given by the field
"sample") will be created in projectdir/samples seqfiles gives the
location of sequencing data files in fastq or ubam format that will be
added to the sample. The value can be the path to a specific file, a
directory (containing the sequencing files), or a (glob) pattern matching
one or more sequencing files (e.g. data/sample1_*.fastq.gz)
The data files are (by default) soflinked in the directory
projectdir/samples/samplename/fastq for fastq files (extension .fastq,
.fq, .fastq.gz, or .fq.gz), and in projectdir/samples/samplename/ubam for
unaligned bam files (extension .bam)

You can have more than one line for the same sample, possibly merging
sequencing data from different sources into one sample. (You can not mix
fastq and ubam sources this way; if both a fastq and ubam directory are
present, only the ubam will be used for analysis)

The extra fields in the samplesheet (if not empty) are added to the projects
options.tsv file, which allows you to set specific analysis options for each
sample, e.g. the samplesheet
{{{
sample	seqfiles	preset
sample1	sample1/*.fastq.gz	srs
sample2	sample2/*.fastq.gz	ont
}}}
will setup a projectdir where sample1 will be analysed using the srs
preset (for short read sequencing), whereas sample2 is an ont sample to be
analysed using the ont preset.

== Arguments ==
; projectdir: project directory name.
; samplename: sample name
; rawdata: directory containing source/raw data (for only one sample), or
one or more raw data files.

== Options ==
; -tranfer soft/rel/hard/copy: determines how raw data files are "transferred" to the sampledir: soft(link absolute path), rel(ative softlink), hard(link) or copy
; -force 0/1: Normally an error is given if the target file already exists. use -force 1 to overwrite existing sample data
; -amplicons ampliconfile: Add amplicons file. This option turns on amplicon sequencing
analysis (see [[cg_process_sample]]) using the amplicons defained in **ampliconfile**
; -targetfile targetfile: Add targetfile. if provided, coverage statistics will be calculated for this region

== Category ==
Process
