= Process =

== Format ==
cg project_addsample ?options? projectdir samplename rawdata ...

== Summary ==
Add a sample directory to a project directory.

== Description ==

project_addsample is a convenience function to add a sample to a
[[projectdir|project directory]] in the proper structure. (You can do the
same manually by creating the directories, adding links ot copying raw
data files) If the project directoy does not exist yet, it will be
created. The command creates a sample directory under projectdir/samples,
and adds the given raw data under projectdir/samples/samplename/ori (by
default using softlinks).

rawdata can either be given as a single
directory (containing the fastq files, Complete Genomics surce data, etc.
according to the type of experiment) or as one or more files. (see
[[howto_process_project]] for examples.

== Arguments ==
; projectdir: project directory name.
; samplename: sample name
; rawdata: directory containing source/raw data (for only one sample), or
one or more raw data files.

== Options ==
; -amplicons ampliconfile: This option turns on amplicon sequencing
analysis (see [[cg_process_sample]]) using the amplicons defained in **ampliconfile**
; -targetfile targetfile: if targetfile is provided, coverage statistics will be calculated for this region
; - tranfer soft/hard/copy: determines how raw data files are "transferred" to the sampledir: soft(link), hard(link) or copy
; -force 0/1: Normally an error is given if the target file already exists. use -force 1 to overwrite existing sample data

== Category ==
Process
