= Pmulticompar =

== Format ==
cg pmulticompar ?options? multicomparfile sampledir/varfile ...

== Summary ==
Compare multiple variant files

== Description ==

This command combines multiple variant files into one **multicompar file**: a
tab separated file containing a wide table used to compare variants
between different samples. Each line in the table contains general variant
info (position, type, annotation, etc.) and columns with variant info
specific to each sample (genotype, coverage, etc.). The latter have a
column heading of the form field-<sample>.

The **<sample> name** used is extracted from the filename of the variant
files by removing the file extension and the start of
the filename up to and including the first -. (Variant files are
expected to use the following convention: var-<sample>.tsv.)
<sample> can be simply the samplename, but may also include information
about e.g. the sequencing or analysis method in the form method-samplename, e.g.
var-gatk-sample1.tsv and var-sam-sample1.tsv to indicate variants called
using gatk and samtools respectively for the same sample (sample1), thus
allowing comparison of different methods, etc.

=== Completing missing information ===
When some samples contain a variant that others do not, the information in
the multicompar file cannot be complete by combining variant files alone:
A variant missing in one variant file may either mean that it is reference
or that it is not sequenced. Other information about coverage, etc. on the
variant not present in the variant file will also be missing. 
multicompar will try to **complete this missing info** based on files (if
present) accompanying the variant file (in the same directory and having a
similar filename). Folowing files can be used for completing multicompar data:

* sreg-<sample>.tsv: a tab-separated region file indicating all regions
that are sequenced. If the variant is located in such a region, the
sequenced-sample value will be set to r (for reference).
Outside of these regions it will be annotated as u (unsequenced).
* varall-<sample>.tsv: an tsv file made by returning "variant" calling
results for all positions. This must contain the same columns as
the variant file. All fields can be completed from a varall file.
If a variant is not in the varall file, it is set to u (unsequenced).

If data can not be completed using accompanying files, the missing
information will be indicated by a questing mark as a value in the table.

=== Adding to an existing multicomnpar ===
Using the same command, you can add new samples to an existing multicompar
file. pmulticompar needs the original variant files and accompanying files
for the existing multicompar file. It can find these files (based on
filename) easily if everything is organised in a
[[projectdir]] (hint: You can add samples in
another projectdir without duplication using symbolic links)
pmulticompar will look however in various places relative to the
multicompar file (same directory, samples directory in same dir, parent
directory, samples directory in parent dir).

=== compared to old multicompar ===
cg pmulticompar is a parallel and much faster version of
[[cg_multicompar|multicompar]]. It also integrates the reannot step in
one. It is more finicky about e.g. directory structure (needs to find the original
sample variant files) and does not support all accompanying information files
that the old one does.

== Arguments ==
; **multicomparfile**: resultfile, will be created if it does not exist
; **sampledir/varfile**: directory or file containing variants of new
sample to be added. More than one can added in one command If a sample
directory is given, all files in it of the format var-<sample>.tsv (or
fannotvar-<sample>.tsv) will be added as variant files.

== Options ==
; **-r 0/1** (--reannotregonly): Also do reannotation, but only region data (sreg) will be updated
; **-t variantfile** (--targetvarsfile): All variants in **variantfile** will be in the final multicompar, even if
they are not present in any of the samples. 
A column will be added to indicate for each variant if it was in the targetvarsfile. The name of the 
column will be the part of the filename after the last dash. If **variantfile** contains a "name" column, 
the content of this will be used in the targets column instead of a 1.
; **-s 0/1** (-split --split): if 1 (default), multiple alternative alleles will be on a separate lines, treated mostly as a separate variant
Use 0 for giving alternatives alleles on the same line, separated by comma in the alt field
; **-e 0/1** (--erroronduplicates): if 1, an error is given if one of the samples to be added is
alread present in the multicompar file. The default (0) is to skip these.
; **-i 0/1** (--skipincomplete): if set to 0, pmulticompar will stop
with an error if no sreg or varall file is found for a sample. If 1 (default), it will
give a warning, but continue making the multicompar file (incomplete for this sample)
; **-m maxopenfiles** (-maxopenfiles): The number of files that a program
can keep open at the same time is limited. pmulticompar will distribute
the subtasks thus, that the number of files open at the same time stays
below this number. With this option, the maximum number of open files can
be set manually (if the program e.g. does not deduce the proper limit, or
you want to affect the distribution).

This command can be distributed on a cluster or using multiple with [[joboptions|job options]] (more info with cg help joboptions)

== Category ==
Compare
