= Process_multicompar =

== Format ==
cg process_multicompar ?options? projectdir ?dbdir?

== Summary ==
process a sequencing project directory. 
This expects a genomecomb directory with samples already processed and
makes annotated multicompar data

== Description ==
This command runs the multicomparison step of [[cg_process_project]].
As input, the command expects a basic genomecomb project directory with
sequencing data (projectdir) for which the samples have already been processed.

Some of the steps/commands it uses can be used separately as well:
* [[cg_pmulticompar]]: combine variant data of multiple samples
* [[cg_annotate]]: annotate combined variant data
* [[cg_multireg]]: combine sequenced region data of multiple samples

== Arguments ==
; **projectdir**: project directory with illumina data for different
samples, each sample in a sub directory. The proc will search for fastq
files in dir/samplename/fastq/
; **dbdir**: directory containing reference data (genome sequence,
annotation, ...). dbdir can also be given in a projectinfo.tsv file in the
project directory. process_project called with the dbdir parameter will
create the projectinfo.tsv file.

== Options ==
; **-split 1/0**: split multiple alternative genotypes over different line
; **-dbdir dbdir**: **dbdir** can also be given as an option (instead of second parameter)
; **-dbfile file**: Use **file** for extra (files in **dbdir** are already used) annotation 
; **-targetvarsfile file**: Use this option to easily check certain target positions/variants
in the multicompar. The variants in **file** will allways be added in the 
final multicompar file, even if none of the samples is variant (or even sequenced) in it.
; **-m maxopenfiles** (-maxopenfiles): The number of files that a program
can keep open at the same time is limited. pmulticompar will distribute
the subtasks thus, that the number of files open at the same time stays
below this number. With this option, the maximum number of open files can
be set manually (if the program e.g. does not deduce the proper limit, or
you want to affect the distribution).
; **-varfiles files**: With this option you can limit the variant files to be added.
(default is to use all found in the project dir).
They should be given as a list of files in this option, so enclose in
quotes. You can still use * as a wildcard, as cg will resolve the wildcards itself.
; **-svfiles files**: With this option you can limit the structural variant files to be added
(default is to use all found in the project dir).
They should be given as a list of files in this option, so enclose in
quotes. You can still use * as a wildcard, as cg will resolve the wildcards itself.
; -extraannot list: lst of extra annotations to add, currently only AnnotSV (for human SVs) is supported
; -keepfields fieldlist: Besides the obligatory fields, include only the fields
in fieldlist (space separated) in the output multicompar. Default is to use all fields
present in the file (*)
; -limitreg regionfile: limit the variants and region multicompar files to
the regions given in **regionfile**. (Other results, such as structural
variants are not limited (yet))
; -distrreg: annotation will be distributed in regions for parallel processing.
Possible options are
** 0: no distribution (also empty)
** 1: default distribution
** schr or schromosome: each chromosome processed separately
** chr or chromosome: each chromosome processed separately, except the unsorted, etc. with a _ in the name that will be combined),
** a number: distribution into regions of this size
** a number preceded by an s: distribution into regions targeting the given size, but breaks can only occur in unsequenced regions of the genome (N stretches)
** a number preceded by an r: distribution into regions targeting the given size, but breaks can only occur in large (>=100000 bases) repeat regions
** a number preceded by an g: distribution into regions targeting the given size, but breaks can only occur in large (>=200000 bases) regions without known genes
** g: distribution into regions as given in the <refdir>/extra/reg_*_distrg.tsv file; if this does not exist uses g5000000
** a file name: the regions in the file will be used for distribution

This command can be distributed on a cluster or using multiple with [[joboptions|job options]] (more info with cg help joboptions)

== Category ==
Process
