= Process_sv =

== Format ==
cg process_sv ?options? cgdir resultdir dbdir

== Summary ==
Do all steps on a Complete Genomics sample to generate structural variant calls

== Description ==
cg process_sv detects structural variants based on discordant read pairs
in the Complete Genomics (CGI) mapping files. 
This structural variant caller was developed on some of the earliest Complete
Genomics samples, and has become a bit superfluous since Complete Genomics
includes structural variant calls in their standard output. There are some
reasons that it may stil be useful:
* On the original data it was more sensitive, picking up smaller deletions
and some small insertions. However, changes in the experimental setup of
more recent runs have nullified this advantage, leading to a great
number of false positives (The deletions < 600 and insertions that the CGI sv 
caller does not detect have to be discarded anyway because of FDR).
* Analysing samples that did not yet have CGI calls
* The intermediate files provide a nice visualisation in combination with [[cg_viz]]

cg process_sv successively runs the following steps:
* **map2sv** creates tab-separated files containing the mapping locations of
each mate pair sorted on the location of the first mate and distributed per chromosome.
(sv/sample-chr-paired.tsv)
* **tsv_index** is used indexes these files.
* **svinfo** 
* **svfind** is used for the actual detection of variants from the mate-pair files, 
resulting in a sv prediction file per chromosome (sv/sample-chr-paired-sv.tsv)
* **cg cat** adds all of these together in one result file (sv/svall-samplename.tsv)
* **cg select** is used to produce the final result file (sv-samplename.tsv) by filtering out (very) low quality calls

== Arguments ==
; **cgdir**: directory conataing the CGI mapping files
; **resultdir**: "sample directory" where results will be written. The resultfile
will be named sv-samplename.tsv (where samplename is the name of the resultdir). All intermediate
data is stored in a subdir sv in **resultdir**
; **dbdir**: directory containing reference data (genome sequence, annotation, ...).

== Options ==
; **-force 0/1**: force full reanalysis even if some files already exist

This command can be distributed on a cluster or using multiple with [[joboptions|job options]] (more info with cg help joboptions)

== Resultfile ==


== Example ==
{{{
cg process_sv GS27657-FS3-L01 NA19238cg /complgen/refseq/hg19
}}}

== Category ==
Variants

