= process_reports =

== Format ==
cg process_reports ?options? sampledir ?dbdir? ?reports?

== Summary ==
Calculates a number of statistics on a sample in the reports subdir

== Description ==
cg process_reports commands calculated a number of statistics on a sample
and stores these in the subdir reports of the sample. If a type of report
cannot be made (e.g. fastqstats if there are no fastqs for the sample), it
will be skipped. Most reports are functional rather than fancy: a tsv file
with sample, source (i.e. program used to make them), parameter and value

Following report types can be selected:
: fastqstats: stats about number, length, quality, ... of reads in the
fastq files made using fastq-stats (files report_fastq_fw-source.tsv and
report_fastq_rev-sample.tsv)
; fastqc: fastqc analysis with graphs etc. per fastq file (in the fastqc subdir)
; flagstat_reads: stats about bamfiles in the sampledir made using samtools flagstat 
(file report_flagstat_reads-source.tsv) based on primary alignments only (so counts reads)
; flagstat_alignmments: stats about bamfiles in the sampledir made using samtools flagstat 
(file report_flagstat_alignments-source.tsv). This counts alignments, not reads (includes secondary alignments)
; samstats: stats about bamfiles in the sampledir made using samtools stats 
(file report_samstats_summary-source.tsv) all kinds of summary stats based on the sam/bam/cram file (including nr reads, etc)
Als creates several report_samstats_section-source.tsv file containing information such as readlength distribution (section=RL),
; histodepth: create a histogram of the sequencing depth. If a targetfile is present, 
histograms for on- and off-target regions will be separated. The report_* version
contains coverage statistics at various depth cutoffs
; vars: number of variants, quality variants ($coverage >= 20 and $quality >= 50), 
etc in the various var files (file report_vars-source.tsv)
; hsmetrics: picard hsmetrics analysis of target coverage
; covered: how much bases are covered in the various region files (5x
coverage, 20x coverage, gatk sequenced, ...), oper chromosome and in total
(file report_covered-source.tsv)
; histo: "histogram" of coverage (file crsbwa-sample.histo)
; predictgender: predict gender of a sample

== Arguments ==
; sampledir: processed sample directory (containing variant files, bam files, etc.)
; dbdir: directory containing reference data (genome sequence, annotation, ...)
; reports: select wich reports to make (can also be given as an option).
You can use **basic** (default) to add all basic reports (currently all except predictgender),
or **all** to create all report types.

== Options ==
; -dbdir dbdir: dir containing the reference databases
; -r reports (also --reports): list of reports to make
; -paired 0/1: fastq reports are split in fw and rev if paired is 1 (default), all data is put under fw if 0
; -threads integer: The underlying code my use **integer** number of threads (default 1, not all reports can use threads)

This command can be distributed on a cluster or using multiple threads with
[[joboptions|job options]] (more info with cg help joboptions)

== Category ==
Process

