= Primercheck =

== Format ==
cg primercheck ?options? primerfile dbdir ?resultfile?

== Summary ==
check primer sets for multiple amplicons and snps

== Description ==
This command checks a list of primersets, given in a tab separated file with at least
the columns name, primer1, primer2. It will add the location of the amplicon amplified
by these primers (in the genome given in **dbdir**) as columns chromosome, begin, end.
If the full primers match more than one amplicon, these values cannot be attributed.

The command will also perform an ePCR by checking if the 15base end parts of the primers 
amplify more than 1 amplicon; the number of amplicons found is in the column 
"numamplicons", the location of the amplicons in "amplicons".

The positions of the primers are checked for known snps (in dbsnp). All snps found 
are listed in the columns "primer1_snps" and /"primer2_snps", together with information 
about position,frequency and validation status. The frequency of the most frequent snp is 
shown in columns "primer1_snpsmaxfreq" and "primer2_snpsmaxfreq".

The "amplicon_fts" column will list any homopolymers detected in the amplicon.

== Arguments ==
; **primerfile**: tsv file that has at least the columns name, primer1, primer2
; **dbdir**: directory containing reference genomes and variation data
; **resultfile**: results will be written to this file if given, otherwise to stdout

== Options ==
; **-m maxnum**: further analysis stops if a primer has > **maxnum** hits in the genome (default 5000)
; **-s maxsize**: only amplicons smaller than **maxsize** are considered in numamplicons (default 1000)
; **-a maxamplicons**: if more than **maxamplicons** are found, further analysis is aborted (default 100)

== Category ==
Validation
