= predictgender =

== Format ==
cg predictgender ?options? bamfile/sampledir ?outfile?

== Summary ==
predicts gender for a sample

== Description ==
cg predictgender calculates a number of relevant metrics and predicts the
gender of the given sample. It outputs the results in report form (tsv
file with parameter/value fields). The predicted gender is in the
predgender line in the results.

Usually the sampledir is given as argument, and the command will find all
files needed for the prediction in it. If a bamfile is given instead, the
command will look for other files needed in the same directory. The other
files used can however also be given explicitely using options (-varfile,
-targetfile)

The measures compare the non-pseudoautosomal region on the Y chromosome (yreg)
to the non-pseudoautosomal region on the X chromosome (xreg). these regions can be 
derived from data in the given reference dbdir (-dbdir) or given directly
by the options -regy and -regx.

The gender prediction is primarily based on the the ratio of median
coverage of 500 target regions in regy vs regx (**pg_yxcovratio**). If this
is unclear (insufficient X coverage, between 0.1 and 0.3), a combination of the
ratio of number of reads mapping to regy (normalized vs the target region)
vs that of regx (**pg_yxnratio**), and the percentage of
heterozygous high quality variants (**pg_pcthqheterozygous**) is
used.

== Arguments ==
; bamfile/sampledir: The bamfile of the sample or the sampledir can be given as first argument
; outfile: if given, results are written to outfile. Otherwise to stdout

== Options ==
; -dbdir dbdir: dbdir containing reference genomes databases, used to find non-pseudoautosomal regions
; -varfile varfile: variantfile used for calculating the percentage of heterozygous high quality variants
; -targetfile targetfile: used to find the size of target area and targeted regions in regy and regx
; -xreg xreg: non-pseudoautosomal region on the X chromosome
; -yreg yreg: non-pseudoautosomal region on the Y chromosome
; -refreg refreg: non X/Y chromosome region, used for adding some reference metrics

== Category ==
Report