= Svmulticompar =

== Format ==
cg svmulticompar ?options? file svfile ...

== Summary ==
Compare multiple structural variant files

== Description ==
This command is used to create multi sv compar_files.
These are tab separated files indicating structural variants present in one or more samples.
As structural variant (sv) calls are usually imprecise, the sv (of
different samples) are approximately matched: Begin, end or alt values do
not have to match exactly. The global variant features (chromosome, begin, end, type, ref, alt)
are taken from the first sample the variant is seen in. (so there can be
small differences due to order of samples given) The values for begin, end
and alt values of each sample are kept as lbegin-sample, lend-sample and
lalt-sample.

SVs match if they are the same type (trans and bnd are considered the same
type for this) and begin, end and alt differences are within the given
margins.
Begin (and end) difference are calculated by the number of bases between
begin positions (and end positions), and must (in general) not be more than
**margin** (default 30) bases.
For deletions and inversions **lmargin** (default 300) is used, but they
also must have at least **minoverlap** (default 75%) percent (vs largest
SV) to match.
Insertions use **margin** (30) from begin and end differences, and pct
overlap (but only based on size, sequence is not compared) must be at
least **minoverlap** (default 75%). For special insertions (alt starts
with <) alts must match completely.
For translocations or breakends **tmargin** (default 300) is used as a
limit for begin and end differences; They must also link to the same
chromosome, and difference in position of the link may also be maximaly
**tmargin**.

== Arguments ==
; **svmulticomparfile**: resultfile, will be created if it does not exist
; **svfile**: file containing structural variants of new sample to be added
More than one svfile can added in one command

== Options ==
; -margin number: Allow begin and end to deviate the number of bases given (default 30)
; -lmargin number: Allow begin and end to deviate the number of bases given for deletions, inversions (default 300)
; -tmargin number: Allow begin and end to deviate the number of bases given for translocations (trans) and breakends (bnd) (default 300)
; -overlap number: minimum percent overlap needed to identify deletions, inversions or insertions (size) as the same (default 75)

== Category ==
Variants
