= bcol format =

The bcol format stores one (or more) column(s) of data in an efficient
binary format. All data must be of the same type (list of supported types
below). bcol files can e.g. used to store a score for each position
of the genome and use this for annotation.

The (new) bcol format consists of two files, one in a text format
describing the bcol data (bcolfile.bcol) and one containing the actual
binary data (bcolfile.bcol.bin.lz4).

== bcolfile.bcol ==
bcolfile.bcol is a [[format_tsv|tab-separated file]] with the following format

{{{
# binary column
# type iu
# default 0
chromosome      begin   end
1       0       50
2       10      51
}}}

The fields "chromosome begin end" must be present, and indicate for which
regions data is present in the binary file. They folow the same zero-based
half-open indexing scheme as all genomecomb tsv files.

The comments before the table must contain the following information:

* The first comment line "# binary column" indicates it is a bcol file.
* The "# type" comment line indicates the type of data in the binary file (supported types listed below)
* The "# default" indicates the default value: the return value for any position not in the file.

=== Supported types ===
; d: double-precision floating point (64 bit) in machine native byte order
; q: double-precision floating point (64 bit) in little-endian byte order
; Q: double-precision floating point (64 bit) in big-endian byte order
; f: Single-precision floating point (32 bit) in machine native byte order
; r: Single-precision floating point (32 bit) in little-endian byte order
; R: Single-precision floating point (32 bit) in big-endian byte order
; w: wide integer (64-bit) in little-endian byte order
; W: wide integer (64-bit) in big-endian byte order
; m: wide integer (64-bit) in machine native byte order
; i: integer (32-bit) in little-endian byte order
; I: integer (32-bit) in big-endian byte order
; n: integer (32-bit) in machine native byte order
; s: small integer (16 bit) in little-endian byte order
; S: small integer (16 bit) in big-endian byte order
; t: small integer (16 bit) in machine native byte order
; c: 8 bit integer (1 byte or character)

== bcolfile.bcol.bin.lz4 ==
bcolfile.bcol.bin.lz4 is the (compressed) binary file containing the
actual data. The uncompressed binary file (bcolfile.bcol.bin) is also
recognized, but by default the binaries are compressed.
A lz4 index file bcolfile.bcol.bin.lz4.lz4i may also exists to speed up
random access to the compressed binary.
