= transcript/gene file =
A transcript/gene file is a [[tsv]] file containing a list of transcripts.
Each line contains one transcript. 
The standard region fields (chromosome, begin and end) indicate the
location of the transcript (and the transcript file is thus also a region file)
while other fields indicate the strand, exons etc.

The basic fields for a transcript file are
; chromosome: chromosome name
; begin: transcription start position
; end: transcription end position
; strand: indication of the strand: + or -, empty or . can be used for unknown
; cdsStart:	start of the coding region (genomic position)
; cdsEnd: end of the coding region (genomic position)
; exonStarts: list of exon start positions
; exonEnds:	list of	Exon end positions
; transcript:	Name of transcript (usually transcript_id from GTF)
; gene:	name of gene (e.g. gene_id from GTF). This field preferentially
        contains the HGNC name for the gene, but other ids are possible

Most genomecomb tools will accept some (commonly encounterd) alternative
fieldnames if these are not present:
; chromosome: "chrom", "chr", "chr1", "genoName", "tName" and "contig"
; begin: "start", "end1", "chromStart", "genoStart", "tStart", txStart", "pos" and "offset"
(end1 is recognised as begin because of the structural variant code in genomecomb, where start1,end1
and start2,end2 regions surround a SV).
; end: "start2", "chromEnd", "genoEnd", "tEnd" or "txEnd"
; transcript:	"transcript_id", "transcriptid", "name"
; gene_name:	"gene","name2", "geneid", "gene_id"

Any other fields can be added, but the following are common:
; exonCount: number of exons
; source: source of data
; geneid: a gene identifier, such as the ensembl id. This field
  can be used to add a specific id as well as the HGNC name (in gene).
  Genomecomb also checks the fields "gene_id","gene_name","gene", "name2"
  for this. Remark that these alternative field names overlap with gene
  alternatives. This provides for when no specific gene id was provided.
