= Introduction =

== GenomeComb ==
GenomeComb provides tools to generate, combine and analyze whole genome,
exome or targetted sequencing data. Variant files in tab-separated format
from different sequencing datasets can be [[cg_multicompar|combined]]
taking into account which regions are actually sequenced (given as region
files in tab-separated format), [[cg_annotate|annotated]] and
[[cg_select|queried]] (several
examples can be seen in the [[howto_query|Howto::Query]] section).
A [[cg_viz|graphical user interface]] able to browse and query multi-million
line tab-separated files is also included.

The [[cg_process_illumina|cg process_illumina]] command can be
used to generate annotated multisample data starting from fastq files,
using tools such as bwa for alignment and GATK and samtools for variant calling.
Sequencing data can also be imported from Complete Genomics
([[cg_process_sample|cg_process_sample command]]), Real Time Genomics
([[cg_process_rtgsample|cg_process_rtgsample command]]) and
VariantCallFormat (VCF) variant files ([[cg_vcf2sft|vcf2sft command]]).
Multiple genomes can then be compared within one single, annotated file using
the  [[howto_multicompar|multicompar protocol]].
You can find info on each separate command in the [[reference]] section.

== File formats ==

The standard file format used in GenomeComb is a simple tab delimited file
(without quoting), where the first (non comment) line contains column
names. This is very flexible and allows for fast parsing. Depending on the
columns present, files can be used for various purposes. Usually the files
are used to describe features on a reference genome sequence. The file
extension .sft (simple feature table) or plain .tsv can be used to refer to this format.
In this context, genomecomb gives following columns specific meanings:

; **chromosome** or **chrom**: chromosome name. Many genomecomb tools allow mixing chr1 and 1 notations
; **begin** or **start**: start of feature. half-open coordinates as used by UCSC bed files and
Complete Genomics files are expected. This means for instance that the first base of a sequence will
be indicated by start=0 and end=1. An insertion before the first base will have start-0, end=0.
; **end**: end of feature in half-open coordinates
; **type**: type of variation: snp, ins, del, sub are recognised
; **ref** or **reference**: genotype of the reference sequence at the feature. For large deletions, the size 
of the deletion can be used.
; **alt**: alternative genotype(s). If there are more than one alternatives, they are 
separated by commas.
; **alleleSeq1**: gentype of features at one allele
; **alleleSeq2**: gentype of features at other allele

Most tools expect the files to be sorted on chromosme,begin,end,type and will create sorted files.
You can sort files using the -s option of [[cg_select]].
Not all the columns must be present, and any other columns can be added and searched. In 
files containing data for multiple samples, columns that are specific to a sample have -samplename 
appended to the column name. Some examples of (minimal) columns present for various genomecomb files:

; **region file**: chromosome begin end.
; **variant file**: chromosome begin end type ref alt ?alleleSeq1? ?alleleSeq2?
; **multicompar file**: chromosome begin end type ref alt alleleSeq1-sample1 alleleSeq2-sample1 alleleSeq1-sample2 alleleSeq2-sample2 ...

These files can easily be queried using the [[cg_select]] functionality or can
be loaded into a local database.

The format does not use quoting, so values in the table cannot contain tabs or newlines,
unless by coding them using escape characters (\t,\n)

== How to start ==

In the [[howto|Howto]] section we give some extended examples on how to process genome files and query the results.
